# Daily Journal & Habit Tracker
#### Video Demo: <https://youtu.be/tybO7_g6jTE?si=GgB40rSqeli2DTCt>
#### Description:

The Daily Journal & Habit Tracker is a mini web application built on the Flask platform, combining a personal daily journal with a basic habit tracker into one tool. It emerged out of an observation that there weren't many existing applications that combined these two elements into one product. Typically, either a journaling app would leave out the notion of habits altogether, or a habit tracker would neglect to capture the reason behind a productive or unproductive day. Keeping both journal entries and habits in one application, each journal entry marked by a mood tag, enables users to go back later and observe some trends, such as the fact that exercise is linked to higher mood levels on a certain day. The overall project follows the pattern established by the Finance problem set in the course CS50: the use of Flask routes, server-side sessions, hashing of passwords, and parameterized SQL queries with the use of cs50 library, rather than a fancy front-end framework or API.

To begin with, the main features of this app include account registration and logging in, writing dated entries with mood levels ranging from one to five points on a scale, the ability to delete or modify these entries afterwards, as well as filtering by mood so that one may have, for instance, a list of all the "Rough" days in a row. In addition to that, there is the possibility to create any number of habits that interest you (reading, exercise, drinking water, etc.). And every time when logging in, users get a dashboard with all of their habits and an opportunity to tick or untick each of them according to whether they completed it that day or not. The stats page will provide information regarding the number of entries for every mood level, and also for every habit – about the amount of days within the last month they were completed, and about the rate of completion. There is no need for JavaScript, except for the one included in Bootstrap to make a collapsible navbar work; everything else can be done through regular form submissions and subsequent page reloads.

The project files include: `app.py`, where all the logic related to the web application implemented in Flask lives – routes related to registration, login/logout actions, the daily dashboard page, full CRUD on entries, the creation/deletion of habits, toggle on/off actions for habits, and the statistics route, which sums up the total mood scores and habit completion rates. `helpers.py`, which includes two small functions inherited almost verbatim from the Finance pset: `apology()` function which displays a simple error message with a specified status code; and `login_required()` decorator which redirects all users not having a current session opened to the login route. `schema.sql` contains definitions of four tables (one for each resource) – users, entries, habits, habit_logs, and two indexes on two most frequently used queries – retrieving entries by a specific user per date, and retrieving habit logs by date. `requirements.txt` is a list of additional required Python packages outside of standard library (the only ones used in addition to cs50): Flask, and Flask-Sessions. `templates/` is a folder containing all of the Jinja templates – `layout.html`, the base template shared by all pages, with the nav-bar and flash-messages; `register.html`, `login.html`, `apology.html`, related to user authentication; `index.html` – the dashboard page; `journal.html`, `new_entry.html`, `edit_entry.html` – listing, searching, adding, and editing journal entries; `habits.html` – managing habits and their toggling on-off actions; `stats.html` – statistics table. Lastly, `static/styles.css` contains minor styling changes using Bootstrap CSS framework and including some extra CSS rules to make cards rounded and have light grey background color.

Some of the choices I made in this application could use a bit more explanation, since there were other equally valid choices that were not taken. The `mood` field in `journal_entries` is an ordinary integer between one and five, rather than some kind of foreign key pointing into another table listing moods, since the five possible moods will not need to change over time. A dictionary mapping each possible mood ID back to a readable name and icon is defined in the `MOODS` Python variable in `app.py`. The `habits` log table uses the simple, scalable structure of storing a row per habit per day in `habit_logs`, rather than adding a boolean `completed` column to the `habits` table, because the latter would make it impossible to track the thirty-day completion rate shown on the stats page, and would not accommodate well to adding features like tracking streaks or a calendar heatmap visualization in the future. Toggling habits on the backend does a delete and insert operation on `habit_logs`, rather than simply toggling a flag in-place on the corresponding habit's row in `habits`. This simplifies the process significantly because there will never be an old row in between that needs to be updated to reflect the state transition, and a single check of whether a habit has been logged can be replaced by checking if a row exists or not. Filter functionality on the `/journal` page has been limited to moods (rather than implementing keyword search) primarily out of consideration for feasibility given the available time, not because of any intrinsic lack of utility, although it is a natural feature to implement after the present system is fully functional. It is listed explicitly in `instructions.txt` as such. Finally, there is no client-side JavaScript logic to speak of in this project, as my focus was on creating something I knew would work from start to finish, and could easily build, test, and explain.
